
[MUSIC PLAYING]

RAFAEL IRIZARRY: Conditional expressions are one
of the basic features of programming.
The most common conditional expression is the if-else statement.
Here's a very simple example showing the general structure
of an if-else statement.
The basic idea of this chunk of code is to print the reciprocal of "a" unless "a"
is zero.
So we type, if a is not 0, print the reciprocal, else print no reciprocal
for zero.
You can run that function now with a equals to 2.
And you get a different answer then if you
run the function with a equals to zero.
Here's a general form of a if-else statement.
We type if and then a condition.
We call these Boolean conditions.
If that is true, this, the expression in the brackets following that condition
are performed.
If that is not true, then the alternative expressions
encompassed by the else brackets are performed.
Let's look at some more examples using the US murders data frame.
We load the data frame and define the murder rate variable.
And now we ask the question, which states, if any,
have murder rates lower than 0.5?
The if statement protects us from the case in which
no state satisfy the condition.
So we can write something like this.
If the smallest state has a murder rate less than 0.5,
print out the name of that state.
But otherwise, say there's no state with murder rates that low.
So if we use 0.5, we get the answer we want,
because that state has a murder rate lower than 0.5.
But if we changed that level to 0.25, we get a different answer.
Now we say, no state has a murder rate that low.
A related function that is very useful is the ifelse function, one word,
ifelse.
This function takes three arguments, a logical, and two possible answers.
If the logical is true, the first answer is returned.
If it's false, the second answer is returned.
Here's an example.
Define a as zero.
And we ask, ifelse a bigger than zero return the reciprocal, otherwise
return a missing data.
If we apply this function, we get back missing data.
But the function is particularly useful, because it works on vectors.
It examines each element of the logical vector
and returns a corresponding answer accordingly.
So let's look at an example.
Let's define a as 0, 1, 2, negative 4, and 5.
Now the result here is going to be the reciprocal, if a is positive,
and a missing data if it's not.
This table helps us see what's happening.
In the first column of the table we have the first vector.
In the third column, we have the first answer.
In the fourth column, we have the second answer.
In the second column, we have the conditional.
If the conditional is true, the first answer is returned.
If it's false, the second answer is returned.
So let's go down the list.
0, is it bigger than 0?
No.
So we return the second answer, the missing data.
So the result column has an NA.
Second one, 1, is it positive?
Is it bigger than zero?
Yes.
So I'll return the first answer, 1 divided by 1 is 1.
That's what I return.
Second one, is 2 bigger than 0?
Yes.
I'll return the first answer, 0.5.
Negative 4, not bigger than 0.
I will return NA, the second answer.
And finally 5, which is bigger than 0, gets a true.
And we return 1 over 5.
Here's an example of how this function can
be readily used to replace all the missing values in a vector with zeros.
This is a very common use of this function,
replacing NAs with some other value.
For this we're going to use an example that is included in the dslabs package,
it's the NA underscore example.
We can load it like this.
And we can see by using the sum of is.na(na_example) that there's 145
NAs in this vector, which contains numbers and NAs.
So what we want to do next is create a new vector called no_nas that replaces
all the NAs with zero, using the ifelse function,
we can do this very easily, like this.
Once we're done with this, we see that the new object no_nas has no more NAs.
All right.
Two more functions, any and all.
These are also quite useful.
The any function takes a vector of logicals and it returns true
if any of the entries is true.
So here's an example.
If I apply any to the vector TRUE, TRUE, FALSE,
I get a TRUE, because at least one of them is true.
If I apply it to FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, I get a false, because none of them
are true.
The all function takes a vector of logicals and returns
TRUE if all the entries are true.
So here's an example.
If z is TRUE, TRUE, FALSE, and I ask all(z),
I get FALSE, because they're not all true.
If I make z TRUE, TRUE, TRUE, then of course
I get a TRUE, because they're all true.
